# Lesson 7: GLSL Advanced POP - Voronoi Fracture pt. 2
- video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DBgDf0OF3q0
- playlist position: 1 of 8 | duration: 00:12:54
- transcript source: YouTube auto-captions (en), timestamps every ~30s
- extracted: 2026-09-25 with yt-dlp 2026.08.19

[00:00:05] All right. Hey everybody, welcome back. So today we're going to be doing GLSL Advanced Pops 2, uh the final course in our introduction to GLSL for POPs and Touch Designer finally. Um, we're going to be continuing our uh example from the last time which was real time voronoid tiling and we're going to be focusing specifically on outputting uh additional buffers and writing to those buffers. So, like I said, I'm picking up where I left off. So, I'm just going to jump
[00:00:35] right into things. Uh, no further ado, catch me on my Patreon and let's finish off this course. Okay, so here we are. Like I said, exactly where we left off from the last lesson. Uh here I've just put back what we're going to be doing in this lesson, which is writing these additional output buffers for the yellow lines in the cracks. Um now I am going to
[00:01:07] again do this a little bit differently. uh we are going to talk through some of the code because it is important but we're also going to talk through uh very importantly some of the setup. So before we get into this code we're going to do a quick example uh to go through the multiple outputs. GLSL advanced. Okay. Uh let's give it a
[00:01:37] point generator. Put that in. Okay. Now, what I'm interested in is not this point generator itself, but rather how to set up the extra outputs. Now one easy thing to do uh or actually it's the best way to say this the thing to know is that to set up an extra output you need to define it using a different pop uh that will set the number of units of geometry it has as well as
[00:02:09] attributes. So for example, if I have a single point and let's say I give it an attribute count that's like an integer. I can name an extra output count. I can give it this pop and I can give it access to the count attribute. And this will allow me to do something like TD point
[00:02:39] count underscore uh count
[00:03:12] one. Let's see what that does. And then we can do a uh pop two. Um, okay. That was stupid. So, what I need is a GLSL select. Duh. And then I'll take that name, that output name count. Okay, there we go.
[00:03:45] So, we're not actually editing this input. This is more like a template to declare the the GPU memory allocation. And then we can see here, yeah, changes to our code are updating the changes to this output. And so, for example, um I don't know, we could have another output that has like another um
[00:04:16] attribute or something like that. Uh you also use this sometimes for like atomic counters. uh it can be pretty helpful. So generally this is the the highle setup. And now for example what if I wanted to try and do element two though. So because our we see that because I'm now setting element two but element two doesn't exist and so we're not seeing that right. But if I were to add more elements.
[00:04:48] So now we have eight points and there's eight points in my output. And we'll see that the the count attribute just for element two is set to one. And so now I think hopefully it's a little bit more clear kind of how this extra output declaration is set up. We have a template attribute or sorry a template pop that sets the dimension and all of our attributes. Then we have a GLSL advance pop that actually performs some logic. And then we have a GLSL select pop that will select the updated output.
[00:05:22] So with all of that said, how do we apply it to our existing shader? Advanced output example. Uh how do we apply it to our shader? So what I want to do is output lines. Now I'm going to do this with a little bit of a hack, let's say. And what I'm going to do is define a line for every primitive that I have. So I have a line right here. My line uh just two points,
[00:05:55] one division. So each of my line has two points, right? Then I have an attribute. I'm giving it a color. And now here's the important thing. I'm taking a copy and I'm copying that line for every one of my primitives. Not doing anything. They're all overlapping. But now I have a bunch of points because I'm copying that line over every one of my uh input primitives.
[00:06:26] Again, this is a hack and it's basically set up to allow me to be able to reposition a line per primitive. um which is what we're doing in our shader. So now that we have all of those lines set up, we have this additional output in our GLSL advanced called cracks out. Again, I'm using this null 2 as the template pop, which declares how many um you know pieces of geometry there is in that output. And then I define here my
[00:06:59] point attributes that I'm interested in reading to and writing to. Now the only real change uh that I had to make in my edge crack was adding this Q. And the Q is basically going to be our uh lines. So it'll make more sense if I come down here. So this is where we left off last time, right? This is uh
[00:07:32] part two. So the first thing we do is define a little array for the cracks point. And here is where our Q comes in. So remember we defined Q as an inout vector 3. And so we're setting Q in our edge crack function based on the results of the calculation, right? And
[00:08:02] so in the edge crack function up here, we have our relative distance function, right? that's getting checked based on the input points and the two um based on the input points and the two sites that we're looking at or the two regions really. Uh where we at here?
[00:08:41] So this section essentially sorry I'm just checking my notes. This section is saying um we're solving for when t equals zero basically to determine where this q should be. And q is going to actually be a ve 3 point that we're going to use to reposition our lines. Okay. So the reason that we do this is to um basically find a 3D point along the edge
[00:09:13] where the boundary passes. And we can use this 3D point along the edge our crack count we're adding each time we have a point that's on an edge. And so then our final step is to use that
[00:09:45] crack count to determine whether or not we're going to reposition a line. Now here we're saying okay if our crack count is two or three then what we're going to do is literally sorry literally write to our cracks out output position attribute at the index of line 0. Okay, what's line 0? Good question. I forgot about this line 0. I'm actually just setting
[00:10:15] up line point zero using our prim index and multiplying by two because each line has uh two points. Each primitive has a line and each line has two points. And then we are initially moving all the lines super far away so that they are not rendered at all unless we decide that we want to render them. And then down here, because we already know what the points one and two are from above, we can just set the position
[00:10:46] of those points equal to the points on the crack that we calculate in our edge crack pass. And then finally, uh we can color the line if we want to. I'm not doing that here. Well, I am, but I'm using a material, so it's getting overridden. Um and then the same thing if we have three cracks instead of two um
[00:11:17] it's essentially just means that it is a junction point and so we perform the exact same thing but we're positioning it at the center instead. Um, so it's like a nice weighted average. And then again, TD point OT TD point underscore cracks out_p means the position attribute of the cracks output points. Uh, and then I simply use a GLSL select
[00:11:47] to select that cracks out output. as I said and we are rendering it. So I could turn this off the render easily. I could also turn this off so we're rendering just the cracks. And that is GLSL voronoid tiling in the pops GLSL advanced including outputting extra buffers for the lines. Uh, I acknowledge
[00:12:19] that this might be a little bit hard to follow and a little bit confusing. So, there's going to be more tutorials demystifying the usage of the GLSL advanced, but again, for a number of reasons, I want to close the book on this example, close the book on this course, and um, wish everybody happy holidays. Also, I think it's kind of great going into the holidays with some some time. So, I hope that you are able to get some free time, do some fun creative stuff, and keep
[00:12:49] learning. Till next time, happy creating.
