# Lesson 0: Introduction to GLSL for POPs
- video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s4_xHUEfWlI
- playlist position: 6 of 8 | duration: 00:29:04
- transcript source: YouTube auto-captions (en), timestamps every ~30s
- extracted: 2026-09-25 with yt-dlp 2026.08.19

[00:00:03] All right, welcome back everybody. It's been a minute since I've released some videos because I've been working on some things behind the scenes. A lot of projects and also some new content to share here on YouTube and Patreon. So today I'm super excited to unveil my next uh major series of uh tutorials. These are going to be going through GLSL for POPs in Touch Designer. So, for those of you that don't know, Pops are a new operator family. Uh, the touch designer has released recently and has really exploded across the the community. So, I wanted to take this
[00:00:34] opportunity to not only extend my prior GLSL in touch designer course, but also to um share a little bit of of information specifically regarding GLSL for POPS because there are some differences and this new operator family is well, we'll get into it, but there are some very good reasons for learning to use GLSO with POP specifically. And so, yeah, this is the very first of this course. There's going to be at least seven lessons. There might be some more
[00:01:04] lessons after this. Um, but I have at least these seven planned and ready to go so far. So, we're going to start with an introduction to GLSL with pops. That's today. Uh, then we're going to go through a couple videos and examples on the GLSL basic pop. We'll do a couple with the GLSL copy pop. And then finally, uh, the GLSL advanced pop. So, I'm going to focus a little bit more this course on practical examples. And I'm going to be focusing a little bit less on the
[00:01:36] let's say very basic syntax and programming mindset for GLSL and Touch Designer. So you should definitely go check out my prior course if you haven't uh really had exposure to those concepts yet as I am going to understand or assume rather that you have a decent understanding with both Touch Designer and basic GLSL as far as like what's going on. Uh so with all of that, let's just jump into things and get going. So
[00:02:06] I'm a new media artist. I am based in Brooklyn, New York. I explore how technology alters human perception and interpersonal connection. And I do this through a lot of interactive installations. Um most of my work is created via GLSL in Touch Designer in some way, shape, or form. Here are some past works that I've used GLSL in. Um this is a large architectural work in China. I have an interactive fluid simulation here that was shown at our Bosle for a couple years. Um Gaussian
[00:02:38] splats using my touch designer Gaussian splat particle system uh component. This is called Synapse. This was a very heavy particle simulation GLSL project. And this was a weather reactive permanent installation that's actually still up in Medigene Colombia. So these are just some examples. You can find some more of my work on my portfolio. Um but I wanted to give a little bit of context and maybe bigger picture as to why these techniques are important and how they can be used to level up the work product.
[00:03:14] All right. So why should we be talking about GLSL and POPS and Touch Designer? I think for a lot of people touch designer is a great tool because it allows you to take the coding and kind of forget about that and focus on the creation. Uh but personally I believe that both of those are great avenues and if you know how to work with the coding itself within touch designer you really have a lot more power and the bounds around what you can do and create for your own work or for clients are much much much wider. So simply put,
[00:03:47] you have a lot more customization and control when you're using GLSL and Touch Designer, even if it's only to do one specific thing that might be very difficult to do it another way. It's easier to read and build complex algorithms. I think this is especially true in POPs because of the way that Touch Designer handles chains of operations with POPs and their attributes. We'll get into that a little bit later. Um, and then finally, POPS gives us several types of GLSL operators, and each of them allow for a
[00:04:19] different use case or expression and functionality. And a lot of those actually would have been prior and possible to do in any other way. So, those open up some really exciting things for us to explore. And we're going to get into all of that over time. Uh, but for today, I'm going to focus a little bit on the basics. make sure we all have the same vocabulary and understanding and then we are going to get into a couple examples in touch designer. So very first what are pops? I mentioned
[00:04:51] that they're a new operator family. Pops stands for point operators. Point operators are a bit of a misnomer because they really can express many different types of geometry. But I think it's a really helpful understanding to just say okay point operators are pops. That means that I'm going to be working in a geometrical mindset. I'm probably going to have a 3D world space to my system. And that's a good baseline context. A little bit more specifically, pops are represented or pops represent rather
[00:05:23] arrays of data on which we run compute shaders. So every pop is really just a compute shader that touches designer is creating for you under the hood. There are some uh examples that I've put over here on the right hand side that are soops that have basically been re-implemented as pops on the GPU. I think the best way to conceptually think of pops are soops that are living on the GPU and much more efficient to compute. That gives us a lot more functionality, but I think they
[00:05:55] are the closest to soops as uh any of the other prior Touch Designer operator families. So, from the TD documentation, I've grabbed a list of some common SOPs that are now existing in POPs as well. Uh, so you can take a look. And in the description for this video, I'm also going to put a couple links to some resources for learning about POPs in general, GLSL POPs, uh, and a couple other things that I think will be helpful. So, make sure you check that out. I'm going to drop the link to my other GLSL and Touch Designer course in
[00:06:27] there too to make sure you have access and direction to get those concepts if you haven't touched them yet. And so I would recommend taking a pause, checking out those resources, make sure you feel great about them before we continue. At the same time, uh, hit like, hit subscribe, and show me some support if you feel like this is helpful information. Okay, so the other big thing that we need to talk about before we can really get into anything GLSL related is
[00:06:58] attributes. Attributes are the key key concept to pop. So the main thing that's different between POPS and the history of Touch Designer and I think they'll be very familiar and comfortable to those of you coming from procedural modeling backgrounds, especially Houdini. but they might be a little bit strange and hard to wrap your head around if you're coming from a different background. So the way that I think about attributes are attributes are
[00:07:33] elemental specific variables. Okay, so I said the pops are point operators but they can operate on other types of geometry like primitives or line strips. Um, so you can think about an attribute is being attached to a piece of geometry, whether that's a primitive or a point or whatever. An attribute is attached to a specific piece of geometry and every piece of geometry is going to have attributes. Most of them will have the same attributes, but the values for each attribute are going to be different based on the different pieces of geometry. The most obvious is going to be position. So position will be an attribute that every point has but obviously this point and this point are
[00:08:04] going to have different attributes for position because they aren't in the same position. Um other common attributes can be color normal scale but you can have an arbitrary number of attributes that can take on any type ve 4 floats arrays all of those things. And because of that, we can really think about starting to have point or element specific variables that we then use in things like noise lookups or feedback loops or simulations. And by
[00:08:34] using this in many different ways, we can start to add a lot of layers of complexity and detail to our touch designer work in ways that previously might have been possible but would have been very difficult. And so that's one of the things that excites me the most about POPS. And another one of the big reasons why I wanted to share this with the community at this point um to help demystify this a little bit and make it a little bit easier for others to get started.
[00:09:07] So now I'm going to talk about the key differences between GLSL that you might have been familiar with in TOPS uh and what we need to do here in POPS. So the main difference is that all GLSL POPs are compute shaders. That means that one, we're not going to be looking at pixels. We're going to be reading elements and their attributes. Two, we're going to be able to read and write to any element in our array, not just the one that we're operating on. And three, our uniforms are all going to be declared a little bit differently.
[00:09:37] Actually, we're not even going to need to declare the uniforms in our shaders anymore because the GLSL pops are set up such that those are declared under the hood for us when we set them up in the parameter pages. Now, I've mentioned before that the GLSL pop is going to come with a couple different varieties. There's the basic pop, the copy pop, the advanced pop, uh, and then actually a GLSL select also. Now, the GLSL select is the most straightforward. is similar to a render select where you grab a specific output.
[00:10:10] So that kind of follows and we'll get into it with the advanced pop. Uh but the other three we're going to look at individually and that's because they each have different functions and are used in sometimes quite different ways. So we're going to start with the GLSL pop itself, get the basics down and then move into the more advanced use cases uh towards the end of this course. Okay. Now, since attributes are going to be like the most important thing that we're working with with our GLSL pops,
[00:10:42] we're going to need to do two things specifically when we set up these attributes. One, we need to say specifically to our shader, this is the attribute for each of these elements that you're going to run over and alter and ultimately output. Now we can use and read as many attributes as we want without um declaring them here in this output attribute section. But anything that we try and write to if we update a position in our shader and want to output the new position uh we'll
[00:11:13] need to delineate using the output attributes parameter here exactly what those uh attribute names are. We also may want to create attributes from within the shader and we can do that very easily on the create attributes tab again by name. They have some predefined names uh like color and normal but then you can also define a custom name for an attribute that you want to create. And so that we'll touch on a little bit in this lesson as well. Uh but I think it's helpful to
[00:11:44] understand. You'll also definitely get errors if you don't have these output attributes set up correctly. And so if it seems like everything is right, but for some reason it's just not working, definitely look here as one of the first places to troubleshoot. Okay, so I'm going to go through a couple quick examples here and talk through them and then we're going to get into the touch designer file. All right, so this is pretty much like the hello world example of GLSL and POPS.
[00:12:17] Actually, it's almost exactly the same as if you just drop down an empty glop and look at the default code. The only thing that I'm doing here that's different is using the last line to create an ID attribute that's name is going to be capital I, capital D, and set that ID attribute equal to the integer ID of the element in the array. So the first point will have ID zero, the second point ID 1, so on and so
[00:12:48] forth until the last point will have ID N minus one. This is super common and it's useful in a number of use cases. We'll use a couple of those later on. Um, but I want to show this and kind of talk through a couple of the main pieces first. Now the first is how to get the element ID and that's using this simple built-in TDindex. uh ignore the underscore sorry TD index. We then have TD num elements which are how many elements are in this array that
[00:13:20] our shader is running over. And then lastly we can write out two attributes that we want to output by using this syntax at the bottom where obviously the capital ID can be the name of any attribute as long as we appropriately declare that attribute in our parameters. And the last thing that I want to mention is the accessing of different inputs and elements. Now in TOPS it's
[00:13:50] very easy. We can read in a different sampler etc. Um here it's going to be a little bit more nuanced but it's also very easy to access different inputs and elements. Actually the example shader that you do drop down looks just like this one. And this last line we can see this TD capital TDI incorpor
[00:14:21] with a zero as the first argument and our index is the second argument. And so what that tells us is we can actually treat this first input like our input index. Right? So that'll be our first pop wired in, second pop wired in, etc. And then our element within that input will be the second argument of this function. We normally will be passing in our index, but we don't necessarily need to because, as I said, we might sometimes want to grab data from an element other than the one our shader is
[00:14:52] currently executing. So, I know that was a little bit of a big overview. Uh, but now we're going to jump into the Touch Designer side of things and look at all of this with a little bit more depth. I want to leave you off with some exercises at the very end. And then from here on out, we'll have a great foundation to jump into the more exciting stuff like our next examples, working with attribute blur, building a particle system, and working
[00:15:24] with multiple inputs. So, we go back to let's say the network editor here and I'll go into my lesson zero. So, here are the examples that we're going to be looking through today. Now, the first thing that I'm going to do is actually create something from scratch. We'll have a point generator
[00:15:55] just like that. And then I'll drop down uh just a regular GLSL pop. Now, this is the default shader code just like I showed you. And I'm going to just simply recreate that ID attribute that I showed you in the hello world example. because we already have a UN ID that's set equal to our TD index. All I need to do is replace that P with the ID and
[00:16:27] then go to my create, you'll see I got an error. ID is an undeclared identifier. But if I create it as a custom attribute, then all of a sudden our error goes away. And now if I use a a pop two, I'll thin out my range so it doesn't freak out too much. And we can see that I now have this ID 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 etc. Just like that, which is exactly what I would expect. And so this is the
[00:16:58] absolute most basic way to understand how a attribute can be created using a GLSL pop. So, I have that again right here. Uh, this is the pre-built example. It's exactly the same. Setting the ID.
[00:17:33] The other way to do it, pardon me. The other way here I am creating the attribute in the GLSL pop directly, but Sometimes you don't want to do that uh especially if let's say the GLSL is inside of a feedback loop. So you may want to use an attribute pop. Create that ID attribute. Set it to a default. And here we can see uh Whoops. The ID is now zero since I dropped this attribute on here. The ID is zero for
[00:18:05] all of them. And then when I drop the shader on instead, we now have real ID numbers based on the elements in the array. And so the only difference between these two guys is how I'm creating the attribute itself. One via the GLSL and the other via an attribute pop prior to the GLSL. Now the other thing that I wanted to talk through here on the examples is uh using that second example which was looking for multiple inputs.
[00:18:38] So let's open the viewers and all of these and we can start to see what we're looking at. So this viewer is the one to keep an eye on and I have this little example set up to illustrate. So let's look at this also. Okay. So I have my shader and actually maybe I can do this and make it a little bit better.
[00:19:20] I think that might work out better. Okay. So here in our shader, as I mentioned, I have my uniforms for my input and my element, and both of those are declared as integers, and they're set up on my vectors page. Now, you'll notice I don't declare them in my shader code as I would if it were a material or a top, but I'm able to use those elements or rather those uh uniforms in the attribute reading function.
[00:19:53] And to do that or to illustrate this, uh I hooked up these sliders. So this is going to be our input index is going to change our input index from zero, one or two. And then this slider is the element index. And so you can see each of these uh except for the very first one have two points with different colors and different spots. And so depending on which input index it is and which element index it is, we see a different
[00:20:24] sphere with a different position and color. Okay, this is a very trivial example, but I wanted to show you one, how to set up uniforms, at least uniform vectors, and two, give a little bit of a practical example showing how uh these different indices can be used to access data, right? And we'll be using uh this same principle a lot more in further lessons because it's
[00:20:54] pretty key uh to a lot of more more involved types of work. All right. And then uh the last example that I have for you today is again kind of using uniforms and samplers. So, for example, um yeah, what I wanted to show you here is the default lookup texture. So, here I have a point
[00:21:27] cloud that I'm just moving around a little bit, right, with the noise. And then I'm trying to look up colors from this texture, this texture. And as you can see, it doesn't look very good. There's banding. Um, it's kind of like blinking. And it's one thing if we're going to try and use like a grid and look up a texture using the grid, it's kind of okay because our grid is a
[00:21:57] nice XY uh, you know, grid shaped points, especially if you view it as as points. We can see, you know, obviously it's nicely laid out, but that all breaks down if we're using something like a point cloud that has a lot more points uh in in kind of a regular space. And it really begins to break down when we start to add a lot of
[00:22:28] noise. Or let's say we have a feedback loop where this particle system is constantly in motion and we want to have some some more robust way of looking up a texture based on a point's starting position. This can also be very helpful if you're trying to let's say recolor a point cloud in the middle of a feedback loop um and a number of other use cases. So let's edit our content in the tech support. You notice all of these shaders are pretty straightforward. They're
[00:22:59] pretty low number of lines because a lot of the overhead is done for us and really you can accomplish a lot with only a few lines of code. A demonstration to the power of these shaders. Uh anyway, what are we doing? So here we have a simple helper function ID to chord. This is just going to take an integer between 1 and n and use the size of the texture that all those elements are getting packed into to translate that single ID
[00:23:30] into a vector 2 x and y. And I'll let you look up on the internet the formula for that and verify it for yourself. What we also have is a sampler called s texture. So I wanted to show you how samplers and texture inputs are defined in these shaders. So we set it up as X texture. I drop this top text onto the top parameter. And then in my shader I'm using tixel fits just like I would in
[00:24:00] topland. And I'm using it with the texture called S texture. Again uniform defined here on the shader. I'm using this chord uh coordinate which I created by calling my ID to chord function passing in my element ID and in this case I have it hardcoded as a 256 texture size because that's what this is. Now I'm sure I just said the word hardcode and everybody
[00:24:31] started to freak out uh hurt. The next one isn't hardcoded. So, as you can see, this makes a lot of sense, but like I said, it's already a grid, and that's not really like doing a whole lot for me. So, in our last example for today, I did two things. One, I started with a point cloud. That point cloud is being moved through 3D space. And then we're using here. Let's
[00:25:03] view this and see if I can make it bigger. Nice. Um, yes. And so now we're using again the same texture. The only difference here is that I am remapping this noise based on the input positions of my point cloud. so that the noise texture itself gets reconfigured with some sort of spatial knowledge of the point cloud and then I use my ID to
[00:25:34] chord function to again look up the texture from that sampler. The key difference in this case is that I'm using the inbuilt texture size function called on s texture to be able to have a non-h hard-coded understanding of my resolution of my texture so that this ID to chord still returns the right element. So this is 222 x 222. That's based on the number of points in
[00:26:04] this point cloud. Uh, but of course because I use this function, it could really be any size and everything would work out. So, finally, yeah, I just have this other example of doing the same uh method but using the built-in top or pop rather that you're supposed to do, which is the lookup texture. Uh but again I personally find the lookup texture to be not so great especially for working with point clouds and stuff with animating position. So
[00:26:37] I think this lookup from texture using GLSL is also a very good illustration of how it can be very easy to accomplish something using a GLSL pop that might be very difficult or actually just kind of impossible to do uh with just pops natively. So, I think that's it for lesson one. We're about at half an hour. I want to keep this pretty short. Now, the lessons after lesson one are going to be available on my Patreon uh for Patreon
[00:27:08] subscribers. This is released on YouTube because I think it's good basic information that everyone should have access to no matter what. Uh but it does take me a bit of work to put these things together. So everything after this is going to be uh teased a little bit on the YouTube channel, but the source files and the entire video lecture are all going to be available on Patreon for subscribers only. Um so go check it out if you're interested. And thank you. Last thing before I go, I
[00:27:38] have a couple exercises for you here as I did in my last course. So here our exercise one is to create a GLSL pop that's going to create an input ID attribute and then use that attribute to create another one. This time it's going to be a vec 2 called lookup ID. And the idea would be to instead of using this line replace this line with uh this lookup ID attribute that you are uh putting together.
[00:28:11] And then the next exercise is just use a GLSL pop to do something cool related to the color attribute of some pop. If you have some pops networks that you're already messing around with, why don't you just throw a GLSL pop in there and mess with the color? And if you don't, this is a great opportunity to create a small simple network or maybe take some of the overview example files from derivative itself. So, with that said, it's going to be it for our very first lesson lesson of GLSL
[00:28:42] in Pops. Thank you for following along with me so far. Thank you for all of your support. Again, like, subscribe, catch me on Patreon. Um, next lessons are going to be coming out within a week, and looking forward to sharing everything else with you. So, happy creating. I'll talk to you all soon.
